---
layout: post
title: Games in 2024 NO. 1: FFXVI 
date: 2024-01-21 17:17 -0400
comments: true
---

This is the first entry in my 2024 games played. I'm not sure how many I will complete this year. Final Fantasy XIV has wound down the raiding season and the group I was running "Savage" with has gone ahead and taken a break until "Dawntrail" comes out later this year (Summer 2024). With that, there was two obvious things that sprang to mind to fill some of that gaming time. The first: finish Final Fantasy XVI which I had started last year but stalled out before going on the holidays.
The second was pending some time playing other games that weren't MMOs this year. Having spent a large chunk of my time in 2023 playing FFXIV and FFXI (on HorizonXI), this meant there had been less time in general for single player games. 

Let's talk about FFXVI now.

From a presentation perspective, FFXVI delivers. The demo that became available before the games release definitely
made sure to remind me of that. The game feels like a PS5 game and plays like one. In fact, many press outlets likened the game to a "high budget Hollywood movie". I played the entire game on "Performance" mode to try and get a higher frame rate -- but this is one place it doesn't really deliver. The frame pacing was pretty bad in many places and it would often dip. Digital Foundry covers this already, so there is no need to go into too much detail on this point.

## Story

Key points:

Story:
* [-] We've seen the "God is angry at mankind story before" and this one didn't add anything too novel
* [-] Political intrigue was good but devolved near the end as things became rapidly part of the god slaying plot
* [+] That being said, this one had some of the best presentation for this type of story and told it well
* [+] The world building was good and the story told the plight of Bearer's quite well without explicitly saying much
* [+] Active time lore is fantastic

The story was good. It wasn't great -- just good. It's one of the better "opression and god slaying" stories I've seen in some time but it didn't break a whole lot that was new to the table either. That's fine though, you can have a great game that doesn't deliver something novel.

Characters:

* [+] Lots of fantastic VAs, shoutout to: Cid, Clive and Midadol
    * Midadol has some facepalm character moments but she's depicated as being young and still learning, so it's OK in my books
* [+] Jill and Clive romance was pretty good
    * Some people didn't seem to think so but I thought their relationship being more about the things not being said was sweet
    * Their parting right before the "final" mission had me tear up a bit, so I felt something :)

No negatives here. The cast was fantastic. Torgal is best boi. 

## Gameplay

* [+] No major bugs which is more than you can say about some modern games
* [+] The combat is a lot of fun when you unlock new stuff during the main game. 
    * **Side-note**: Unfortunately, the game rewards you for spamming the same 10 combos and there is a not a ton of strategy involved
    * Learn to dodge and spam the same combos over and over until something is dead :) Nothing to deep, but still fun to play
* [+] Hunts were fun as heck and offered some real challenge
    * Needed more that S tier
* [-] Collecting resources on the field was pretty worthless at times. It was not uncommon for me to spend time running all over the map and getting prompts like ["Got 3 Gil"](https://www.reddit.com/r/FFXVI/comments/14siwla/why_are_there_so_many_items_that_turn_out_to_be_2/).
    * Exploration is more or less worthless, in terms of secrets to find there isn't much. There are some off shoots of the map that you can explore but they don't really provide much of value. 
    * One of the few times you are rewarded [it's the Masaamune](https://www.reddit.com/r/FFXVI/comments/14siwla/comment/jqzskiq/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x&context=3) and it's worse than _Ragnarok_ which most people that are doing the side content will have by this point
    * I didn't ever think about trying to use my dozen different type of materials and all the good ones come from hunts and are unique
* [-] Gil management is a problem if you just buy things as you find them, the orcheastrian rolls cost a _lot_. Gil is otherwise worthless
* [-] The pacing is pretty bad near the end, with tons of content opening up as the story is trying to wrap up
    * By the time you reach the "final main mission", there is no fewer than at least a dozen side quests that unlock. 
    * The ending sequence is fantastic and some folks are probably at risk of being burned out and not even reaching it due to this
    * A lot of the those side quests involved killing the same "Akashic" enemies over and over, bandits or something else. Not much variety at all
* [~] Leveling and the skill trees is largely pointless
    * Yes, I know mastering the Eikons on the tree does let you use them in other combos which can be handy but the game does not require any sort of combos and it's mostly for "fun" rather than any sort of actual way to enrich the gameplay
    * Levels as far as I can tell are very minute and the game has you in a very specific level range most of the time since there is no grinding at all

* [~} The difficulty is far too easy out of the gate
    * Losing to something whill checkpoint you into part of the fight and give you all your consumables back. It is basically impossible to get walled, for better or worse even on the "action" difficulty
    * I don't play many action games at all but I think I rolled a game over screen twice and both times was during a hunt where I was being reckless. I have finished Elden Ring but I died a _ton_ in that game :)


I did actually have a lot of fun playing FFXVI, even though you might not have guessed that from the slanted negative feedback. The problem isn't so much that FFXVI was unfun to play because if it had been that way, I would not have finished. Rather, it was fun to play in 1-2 hour increments while ignoring many of the optional "not fun" stuff. Smashing enemies was fun. Smashing Akashic with "no thoughts, head empty" for 3 hours is not fun. Exploring the maps is kind of fun to look at the scenic views was fun. Exploring every nook and cranny for 3 hours to just find 32 more bloody hides and some characol is not. (That don't do anything for me. This isn't an Atelier game -- there is no sophisticated crafting system here)

The game does have some optional systems to keep you engaged in the combat but it's mostly just a side thing. You don't unlock the harder difficulty until you finish the game ("Final Fantasy Mode") and the game is already a bit on the longer side (or average for JPRGs), so most folks are not going to play through it again.

## Music

The music was extremely well done. There's not much else to say here. Soken did a great job. Some of the best:

* [Final Fantasy XVI Ascension OST (Ifrit Risen vs Bahamut Theme)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yDD_3Nl9X_k)
* ["My Star" (Ending & Jill's Theme)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sl36kjZBLMw)
* [Final Fantasy XVI OST - The Hideaway](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rjDtaHuVTbk)

## Overall thoughts

* Probably in the middle in terms of Final Fantasy games I've played, though it's hard to say
* It's still very much worth playing if you're interested at all, just expect more of an action game and less of an RPG
* I will likely come back and enjoy the DLC in 6 months time when I've had some time away from it
  * I also expect that since the DLC is lean I will get most of the good parts of the game: combat, story, characters and world building and not a lot of the "exploring bare lands, collecting useless resources, etc"

I don't think I'll rate games until the very end. 